---
description: A short summary of what OP Stack is why developers choose it.
---

# 🧰 OP Stack

The OP Stack is like the ultimate toolkit for L2 blockchain creation, masterfully crafted by the Optimism Collective. Think of it as a curated set of software tools 🧰, each handpicked and maintained by the experts at the Optimism Collective. Some tools lay the foundation, while others seamlessly integrate as modules 🧩.

In essence, the OP Stack brings the concept of modular blockchains to life 💡. It's all about providing developers with a ready-made platform, eliminating the need to start entirely from square one. It's innovation made easy! ✨

#### **Why are developers choosing OP Stack?**

In essence, the OP Stack brings the concept of modular blockchains to life 💡. It's all about providing developers with a ready-made platform, eliminating the need to start entirely from square one.

In the OP stack, there are three primary layers:

1. **Consensus** 🤝: This layer encompasses **Data Availability and Derivation**.
2. **Execution** 🔄
3. **Settlement** 💼

Each of these layers functions as an API, offering flexibility and customization. As long as you align with the APIs, the sky's the limit for what you can build!

#### Let's break down OP Stack further:

Here I will provide a short explanation of each layer accompanied by a mathematical representation, for better learning.

*   **Data Availability Layer**: Think of this as a storage unit, holding an array of bytes.

    ```jsx

    type DA = bytes[]

    ```
*   **Derivation Function**: This function takes in the previous state and the data from the availability layer. Depending on the input, it either produces a payload or returns nothing.

    ```jsx

    derive(previous State, DA) ⇒ {Payload or null}

    ```
*   **Execution Function**: Acting on the payload generated by the derivation function, this function processes the previous state to produce a new state.

    ```jsx
    execute(previous State, payload) ⇒ boolean (0 or 1)

    ```
*   **Validity Function**: The final check! This function ensures the new state is valid, considering all other functions.

    ```jsx

    valid(previous State, new State, DA, derive, execute)

    ```

The OP Stack marks the initial stage in the rapid growth of highly compatible Layer-2s and Layer-3s, collectively referred to as **op-chains** within Optimism's ecosystem.

As we look ahead, the boundaries between op-chains will dissolve, giving rise to a unified **Superchain.** This Superchain will seamlessly integrate multiple op-chains, allowing for the shared utilization of collective resources.

For more in-depth however concise explanation of OP Stack check this Youtube, it is fun to watch!

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/jnVjhp41pcc?si=_fK6krDT8xfkGLkz" %}



{% embed url="https://stack.optimism.io/docs/understand/explainer/" %}

{% embed url="https://optimism.mirror.xyz/2jk3D1Y8-hid8YOCUUa6yXmsyzNCYYyFJP0Nhaey9x0" %}
